Spectral Deconfounding

Spectral Deconfounding via Perturbed Sparse Linear Models
Domagoj Ćevid

cevid@stat.math.ethz.ch

Seminar für Statistik
ETH Zürich
8092 Zürich, Switzerland

arXiv:1811.05352v3 [stat.ME] 17 Aug 2020

Peter Bühlmann

peter.buehlmann@stat.math.ethz.ch

Seminar für Statistik
ETH Zürich
8092 Zürich, Switzerland

Nicolai Meinshausen

meinshausen@stat.math.ethz.ch

Seminar für Statistik
ETH Zürich
8092 Zürich, Switzerland

Editor:

Abstract
Standard high-dimensional regression methods assume that the underlying coefficient vector
is sparse. This might not be true in some cases, in particular in presence of hidden,
confounding variables. Such hidden confounding can be represented as a high-dimensional
linear model where the sparse coefficient vector is perturbed. For this model, we develop
and investigate a class of methods that are based on running the Lasso on preprocessed
data. The preprocessing step consists of applying certain spectral transformations that
change the singular values of the design matrix. We show that, under some assumptions,
one can achieve the usual Lasso `1 -error rate for estimating the underlying sparse coefficient
vector, despite the presence of confounding. Our theory also covers the Lava estimator
(Chernozhukov et al., 2017) for a special model class. The performance of the methodology
is illustrated on simulated data and a genomic dataset.
Keywords: confounding, data transformation, Lasso, latent variables, principal components

1. Introduction
Many datasets nowadays include measurements from many variables. The corresponding
models are typically high-dimensional with many more parameters than the sample size.
For statistical estimation and inference, there is a vast literature which assumes sparsity.
For example, see the monographs by Bühlmann and van de Geer (2011), Giraud (2014) or
Hastie et al. (2015).
However, the performance of many high-dimensional regression methods might suffer
in presence of unobserved confounding variables which affect both the predictors and the
response. Confounding is a severe issue when interpreting regression parameters, often,
but not necessarily, in connection with causal inference. A prime example are genetic
studies where unobserved confounding can easily lead to spurious correlations and partial
1

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

dependencies (Novembre et al., 2008). Even when one is concerned with only prediction, the
causal parameter leads to predictive robustness against perturbations of the confounding
variables.
Adjusting for unobserved confounding variables is very important in practice and several
deconfounding methods have been suggested for various settings (Gerard and Stephens, 2017;
Leek and Storey, 2007; Gagnon-Bartsch and Speed, 2012; Wang and Blei, 2018; Paul et al.,
2008). Often, the methods try to estimate the confounding variables directly from the data,
usually by using some factor analysis technique. There are not many theoretical results
justifying the methods, especially since some of them are quite complicated and therefore
difficult to analyze.
Our focus is on linear models. In absence of confounding variables, when the response
is affected only by a small number of predictors, i.e. the coefficient vector is sparse, one
can efficiently estimate the active set and the corresponding coefficients with the Lasso and
related methods and thus achieve the minimax optimal `1 -norm estimation error rate, see,
for example, Bickel et al. (2009) or the monographs by Bühlmann and van de Geer (2011)
or Wainwright (2019). However, these methods are not adequate in presence of confounding
in linear model, since in addition to just a few predictors that indeed affect the response,
we have additional association of the response with many other predictors, as they contain
information about the confounding variables.
Some approaches for relaxing the sparsity assumption are (i) the notion of weak sparsity
(Van de Geer, 2016), where the regression parameter β fulfills the condition that kβkq is
small for some 0 < q < 1 or (ii) assuming the structure that the regression parameter can
be represented as a sum of a sparse and a dense vector. The case (i) does not call for a
new method or algorithm: in fact, the Lasso still exhibits optimal convergence rate if kβkq
is sufficiently small (Van de Geer, 2016). On the other hand, case (ii) requires a different
method such as, for example, Lava (Chernozhukov et al., 2017).
Here we investigate how to deal with the confounding by analyzing the second case where
the parameter is a sum of a sparse and a dense part. If many predictors are affected by the
confounding variables, the true underlying regression vector will be changed by some small,
dense perturbation. We propose left multiplying the response Y and the design matrix
X consisting of the values of the predictors by a carefully chosen spectral transformation
matrix F which transforms the singular values of X. The transformed response and design
matrix can then be used as the input for a high-dimensional sparse regression technique:
we consider the Lasso as a prime example. We investigate the theoretical properties and
empirical performances for the class of spectral transformations. As a result, we conclude
that certain spectral transformations that shrink the large singular values, such as the Trim
transform which we introduce in this paper, perform well over a range of scenarios, pointing
out also some advantages over other techniques and approaches.
1.1 Relation to other work and our contribution
For adjusting for the effect of unobserved confounding, the most prominent method
in practice is to adjust for the top several principal components of the predictors, see
for example (Novembre et al., 2008). Such PCA adjustment is also a special case of the
FarmSelect estimator (Fan et al., 2020) for the linear model, which considers the problem
2

Spectral Deconfounding

of high-dimensional variable selection where the latent variables cause the correlations of
the predictors, but do not directly affect the response. PCA adjustment is a special case
of a spectral transformation. Our presented theory explains when and why this method
works well and proposes an alternative transformation, called Trim transform, which has an
advantage that one does not need to estimate the number of principal components to adjust
for.
The Puffer transform, which maps all singular values to 1, has also been suggested for
improving the variable selection properties of the Lasso for a sparse high-dimensional linear
model (Jia et al., 2015). Our theory gives a more precise result about the Puffer transform
for the estimation problem: the Trim transform is at least as good as Puffer transform and
substantially better when the sample size is close to the number of predictors. In Shah and
Meinshausen (2018), the Puffer transform in combination with bootstrap aggregation is
used in order to estimate the covariance matrix in presence of confounding variables, a very
different quantity than the precision matrix or regression coefficients.
Chandrasekaran et al. (2012) address the problem of estimating the precision matrix in
presence of a few hidden confounding variables. Then the observed precision matrix can
be represented as a sum of the initial sparse precision matrix and a low-rank perturbation
due to the confounding variables. Their model is similar to the one we consider, but the
assumptions and the goals differ. We aim to estimate just the regression coefficients instead
of the whole precision matrix and the method we propose is much simpler. Furthermore,
the theoretical conclusions are substantially different: we establish the convergence rates in
terms of the `1 -norm estimation error, while they consider support recovery and `∞ -norm
bounds for the low-dimensional setting, assuming strong conditions. Also Fan et al. (2013)
have considered low rank plus sparse problems from the viewpoint of factor models: their
contribution provides a rich source of references from an area which is vaguely related to
our current work.
The Lava estimator (Chernozhukov et al., 2017) is the most similar to our Trim transform.
The theory we develop, covering also the Lava, gives a result for the `1 -norm estimation
error rate for the sparse coefficient vector. This goes well beyond the theory given by
Chernozhukov et al. (2017) for justifying the original and interesting Lava method. There,
the authors mostly consider the Gaussian sequence model but also provide general bounds
for high-dimensional regression whose (e.g. asymptotic) behavior is not further analyzed
in terms of restricted eigenvalues and the sparse and dense component of the underlying
unknown parameter vector. Our presented theory exploits the specific structure of a hidden
confounding model which provides a different motivation than the one in Chernozhukov
et al. (2017), where no confounding was considered. In addition, our developments suggest a
simple rule for the choice of the `2 -norm regularization parameter for the Lava estimator,
leaving only the `1 -norm regularization parameter as the single parameter to be tuned by
cross-validation.
Our contribution can be seen as threefold. We describe a class of spectral transformations
and propose a simple spectral transformation called Trim transform, which is perhaps slightly
easier to use than the Lava or the PCA adjustment estimator. Furthermore, for the linear
model where the underlying sparse parameter has been perturbed, we provide novel theory
establishing for a certain class of spectral transformations a fast convergence rate for the
`1 -norm estimation error of the true underlying sparse parameter. Finally, and as our
3

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

primary goal, we use these results to show how the issue of hidden confounding can be
addressed by using a wisely chosen spectral transformation, such as e.g. Trim transform,
with the Lasso afterwards: we establish under certain assumptions the same convergence
rate as the one of the Lasso for a linear model without confounding and illustrate the
empirical performance of our method on simulated and real genomic data. Our method is
entirely modular and can be used not only in conjunction with the Lasso, but also any other
reasonable high-dimensional linear regression method.

2. The models
In this section we consider a linear model with additional confounding. We also introduce
a perturbed linear model and show how it relates to the confounding model. Our theoretical
results apply to the perturbed linear model as well and it is useful for better understanding
of the confounding model.
2.1 Confounding model
Consider a standard (high-dimensional) linear model with n observations and p predictors
X1 , . . . , Xp linearly affecting the response Y . Suppose further that q additional unobserved
confounding variables linearly affect the response as well. The confounding variables are
correlated with the predictors, introducing additional spurious correlations between the
response and the predictors.
The model for n i.i.d. observations is given by:
Y = Xβ + Hδ + ν

(2.1)

where X ∈ Rn×p is the matrix of predictors and H ∈ Rn×q represents the hidden confounding
variables, which exhibit correlation with X, i.e., Cov(H, X) 6= 0 (with a slight abuse of
notation, we write Cov(H, X) as the covariance of any row of H and X). We assume
that X and H have i.i.d. rows that are jointly Gaussian and that ν ∈ Rn is a vector of
sub-Gaussian errors with mean zero and standard deviation σν , independent of X and
H. The vectors β ∈ Rp and δ ∈ Rq are fixed coefficients; we additionally assume that
β is sparse with exactly s non-zero components. Since the model does not change under
the transformation H ← HCov(H)−1/2 , δ ← Cov(H)1/2 δ, we can assume without loss of
generality that Cov(H) = Iq , i.e. the confounding variables are uncorrelated.
Note that by L2 projection, X can also be written as
X = HΓ + E,

(2.2)

where we choose Γ ∈ Rq×p such that Cov(H, E) = 0:
Γ = Cov(H)−1 Cov(H, X) = Cov(H, X).
The matrix Γ ∈ Rq×p describes the linear effect of confounding variables on X. The
random term E ∈ Rn×p can be seen as the unconfounded design matrix; without confounding,
i.e. when H = 0, it equals X. The columns of E are allowed to be correlated and we
denote its covariance matrix by ΣE ; if the components of E are (weakly) uncorrelated,
4

Spectral Deconfounding

X is generated from an (approximate) factor model (Anderson, 1958; Chamberlain and
Rothschild, 1982). Here the hidden variables do not encode a factor structure for X alone,
but also in addition generate confounding effects.
A main example of the above model is a structural equation model (SEM)
X ← HΓ + E,
Y ← Xβ + Hδ + η
and thus β is the direct causal effect of X on Y . In a standard SEM with no further hidden
variables, the components of E would be assumed independent.
We will show in Section 4 that one can recover the coefficient β if the confounding is
dense in a certain sense, e.g. when the rows or columns of Γ = Cov(H, X) are realizations
of independent and identically distributed random variables with mean zero.
2.2 Perturbed linear model
The confounding model (2.1) is related to the perturbed linear model
Y = X(β + b) + ,

(2.3)

where the sparse coefficient vector β has been perturbed by the perturbation vector b ∈ Rp
and  ∈ Rn is the vector of sub-Gaussian errors independent of X with standard deviation
σ. Here we assume that the rows of X are i.i.d. sub-Gaussian vectors with mean zero and
covariance matrix Σ = Cov(X).
The relationship between models arises by rewriting (2.1) as
Y = X(β + b) + (Hδ − Xb) + ν,
where b satisfies that Cov(X, Hδ − Xb) = 0, i.e., Xb is the L2 -projection of Hδ onto X.
This gives us the formula
b = Cov(X)−1 Cov(X, H)δ
−1
= Cov(X, H)Cov(H)−1 Cov(H, X) + Cov(E)
Cov(X, H)δ

(2.4)

The error is given by  = (Hδ − Xb) + ν, which by construction of b is uncorrelated
with X and thus independent of X, because the rows of X and H are assumed to be
jointly Gaussian in the confounding model. We require such independence (induced by joint
Gaussianity) in the proof of Theorem 2, although  being uncorrelated with X might be
sufficient. The variance of the error is given by
σ 2 = Var(Hδ − Xb + ν) ≤ kδk22 + σν2 .
One can think of Hδ − Xb as the part of the confounding that can not be explained
by X and which just increases the variance of the additive error. Xb is the part of the
confounding effect Hδ that is correlated with X and, as is well known, the bias b due to the
confounding makes the estimation of β more difficult.
5

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

In conclusion, the confounding model (2.1) can be thought of as a special case of the
perturbed linear model (2.3), but with additional relationship between the design matrix X,
the perturbation vector b, given by (2.4), and the additive error .
The perturbed linear model is in general unidentifiable since we can only infer β + b
from the data generating distribution. This makes the estimation of β impossible, unless
b has a certain structure; we will be able to asymptotically retrieve the sparse coefficient
vector β, by assuming, for example, that b converges to 0 in some norm. In Section 4, we
investigate under which conditions we are able to infer the sparse part β and how efficiently
in terms of statistical accuracy.
It could be interesting to estimate the coefficient vector β + b rather than just β, but
it is impossible to do in general in the high-dimensional case; even if we knew β exactly,
estimating b would mean estimating p coefficients from n < p data points, which is impossible
without additional assumptions about the structure of b.
2.3 Relationship with the factor model literature
Even though the confounding variables are hidden, we are able to infer some of their
properties if they affect many of the observed predictors X. This is the essence of factor
analysis, where a lot of interesting work has been done. If the latent factors H linearly
affect the covariates, as it is the case in the confounding model (2.1), they can be estimated
well (up to a rotation) from the principal components of the design matrix X = HΓ + E
(Chamberlain and Rothschild, 1982; Bai, 2003), especially if one additionally imposes certain
assumptions on the factor loadings Γ (Bing et al., 2017).
There are several related models considered in the literature. In certain cases (Paul
et al., 2008; Bing et al., 2019) we assume that only the latent factors affect the response and
the observed covariates are only used to obtain information about the latent factors:
Y = Hδ + ν,

X = HΓ + E.

In Bai and Ng (2006) one has an additional contribution of some other known low-dimensional
covariates W :
Y = W β + Hδ + ν,
X = HΓ + E.
Another line of work assumes that the latent factors do not directly affect the response:
Y = Xβ + ν,

X = HΓ + E,

but that they only cause the predictors to be correlated (Huang and Jojic, 2011; Fan et al.,
2020). Such correlation makes the analysis much more difficult, especially for the problem
of variable selection, and one can use the factor analysis to address this issue.
In this paper we allow the latent confounders to affect both the predictors and the
response and focus on the estimation of the sparse coefficient vector β, which has a causal
interpretation as it describes the direct effect of the predictors on the response. The key
difficulty is to handle the bias b in the observational data caused by the latent confounders.
The assumption of dense confounding, expressed in detail in Section 4, is related to the
spiked covariance assumptions common in the factor analysis literature (Paul et al., 2008;
Bai, 2003). It is used to make conclusions about the structure of the coefficient perturbation
b rather than about the factor identifiability. We avoid estimating the factor variables
directly, but instead we adjust for them implicitly, by transforming the singular values of X.
6

Spectral Deconfounding

3. Methodology
In the following, we propose and motivate some methods based on a class of spectral
transformations.
3.1 Spectral transformations
Let X = U DV T be the singular value decomposition of X, where U ∈ Rn×r , D ∈
∈ Rp×r , where r = min(n, p) is the rank of X. We write d1 ≥ d2 ≥ . . . ≥ dr for
the diagonal elements of D. We use the truncated form of SVD, which uses only non-zero
singular values.
The idea is to first transform our data by applying some specific linear transformation
F : Rn → Rn and then perform the Lasso algorithm:
Rr×r , V

X → X̃ := F X
Y → Ỹ := F Y


1
2
β̂ = arg min
kỸ − X̃βk2 + λkβk1 .
n
β

(3.1)

We restrict our attention to the class of spectral transformations, which transform the
singular values of X, while keeping its singular vectors intact. Let D̃ be an arbitrary r × r
diagonal matrix with diagonal elements d˜1 , . . . , d˜r . Our spectral transformation matrix is
given by
˜

d1 /d1
0
...
0
 0
d˜2 /d2 . . .
0 
 T

(3.2)
F =U .
..  U
..
..
 ..
.
.
. 
0
0
. . . d˜r /dr
and then we have
X̃ = F X = U D̃V T
In this paper we explore the question of what is a good choice of F for the estimation
of β. In general, the Lasso performs best when the predictors are uncorrelated and when
the errors are independent. Therefore, a good choice of F needs to find a good balance
between a well behaved error term ˜ = F , well behaved design matrix X̃ and well behaved
perturbation term X̃b.
One such transformation is the Trim transform which limits all singular values to be
at most some constant τ :
d˜i = min(di , τ ).
(3.3)
We show in Section 4 that it can, under some assumptions, achieve the same `1 -norm error
rate for the estimation of the unknown sparse coefficient vector β as the Lasso in the case of
no confounding. We also show that the median singular value is a good choice of τ :
τ = dbr/2c
7

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

3.2 Existing methods and motivation
We discuss some existing methods which are related to the spectral transformation
method described above and provide further explanations and relationships between them.
We also present intuitive explanation why our suggested method should work well against
dense confounding.
3.2.1 Examples of spectral transformations
Several existing methods consist of first transforming the data with a certain matrix
F (some of which fall into class of spectral transformations (3.2)), and then using some
regression method, such as the Lasso.
Lava One such example is the Lava estimator (Chernozhukov et al., 2017), designed for
the linear model where the coefficient vector can be written as a sum of a dense and a sparse
vector. It is originally given by (with a slight change of notation)


1
2
2
(β̂, b̂) = arg min
kY − X(β + b)k2 + λ2 kbk2 + λ1 kβk1 ,
n
β,b
which can be seen as a combination of Lasso and Ridge regression. It is shown in Chernozhukov et al. (2017) that the solution of this optimization problem is given by
F = (Ip − X(X T X + nλ2 Ip )−1 X T )1/2 ,


1
2
β̂ = arg min
kỸ − X̃βk2 + λ1 kβk1 ,
n
β
b̂ = (X T X + nλ2 Ip )−1 X T (Y − X β̂).
From here, one can see that the estimator of the sparse part is just a Lasso estimator applied
to the transformed data, where
s
nλ2 d2i
d˜i =
.
nλ2 + d2i
This transformation is visualized in Figure 4.1.
Puffer transform Another example is the Puffer transform introduced in Jia et al. (2015),
which uses the Lasso after mapping all non-zero singular values di to a constant d˜i = 1. The
algorithm is analyzed as a preconditioning method for the variable selection problem without
any coefficient perturbation. This transformation decreases the correlations between the
columns of the design matrix, but it can inflate the errors, especially when p is close to n. It
can also be thought of as a special case of the Lava transformation in the case when λ2 → 0,
ei
since then √dnλ
→ 1 (the denominator here is just a scaling factor). The transformation is
2
displayed in Figure 4.1.
PCA adjustment Another example of a spectral transformation is given by PCA-based
methods for adjusting for hidden confounders (Novembre and Stephens, 2008; Fan et al.,
2020; Bai, 2003). In the confounding model (2.1), the effect of confounding variables will
approximately lie in the span of the first few principal components of X (see Figure 3.1).
8

Spectral Deconfounding

One adjusts for a first few principal components from the columns of the design matrix X
before further analysis in hope of removing the effect of the confounding variables (Paul et al.,
2008; Huang and Jojic, 2011). This procedure is in fact analogous to applying a spectral
transformation, where the matrix D̃ is obtained from D by mapping the first several singular
values to 0. See also Figure 4.1 for an illustration. The slight difficulty with this approach is
knowing exactly the number of principal components to remove. Asymptotically, this can
be done with high probability (Bai, 2003) under certain assumptions on the separation of
the singular values. However, for finite samples or if there is a slight model misspecification,
it might not be that easy to estimate q, see e.g. our real data genomic dataset in Figure 5.6.
3.2.2 Some intuition
Since our method (3.1) is invariant under transformation F → cF , for arbitrary constant
c ∈ R, we can assume without loss of generality that the singular values of F are at most
1, i.e. the transformation F shrinks all vectors, with different shrinkage in directions of its
singular vectors. Ideally, we would like to shrink in a way such that the perturbation term
X̃b becomes much smaller compared to the signal X̃β.
Trim transform has the highest shrinkage along directions of the singular vectors corresponding to large singular values. The more b is aligned with the first few singular vectors
of X (those corresponding to large singular values), the larger kXbk2 will be. Therefore,
shrinking those large singular values ensures that kX̃bk stays small regardless of the direction
b is pointing to. It is especially the case in the confounding model that b approximately lies
in the span of the first few singular vectors (see Figure 3.1).

Figure 3.1: Size of the projection of b onto Vi for different i, for a random dataset drawn
from the confounding model with q = 10 confounding variables, as described in
Section 5.1.1. We see that the projections of b onto the first 10 singular values
are substantially larger than the rest.
As can be seen from definition of b, Xb is the part of the confounding effect Hδ which is
√
correlated with X. Therefore, kXbk2 can be just as large as kHδk2 = O( nkδk2 ). However,
9

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

after applying the Trim transform we have that


s
2
kδk2 
√
= O(kδk2 ),
kX̃bk2 ≤ λmax (X̃)kbk2 = O  p ×
p
which is substantially smaller than before. λmax (X̃) is the largest singular value of X̃,
√
which will be shown in Lemma 2 to be of order p for the Trim transform and we have
q

kbk2 = O kδk22 /p under certain model assumptions by Lemma 1.
On the other hand, the signal Xβ lies in the span of a sparse set of predictors. Therefore,
the signal X̃β will be approximately of the same size as the signal Xβ before transformation,
unless β is aligned with the large singular vectors, which are shrunk the most. This is very
unlikely if they are sufficiently random. This is illustrated in Figure 3.2. Therefore, by
shrinking large singular values, kXbk2 will decrease much more compared to kXβk2 .

Figure 3.2: Visualisation of the relationship between the perturbation b, signal β and singular
vectors of X. In the confounding model b will be much more aligned with the
singular vectors corresponding to large singular values than β.

4. Theoretical Results
In this section we analyse the behaviour of the `1 -estimation error for the sparse coefficient
β for an arbitrary spectral transformation F . We derive results for the perturbed linear
model (2.3) and relate them to the confounding model (2.1) by using the relationship between
them.
We show that if our spectral transformation fulfils certain criteria, and the confounding
is dense in the sense that every confounding variable affects many predictors, we achieve in
the high-dimensional case the same `1 -error rate as the Lasso in the case when we have no
confounding, despite the presence of the coefficient perturbation caused by the confounding
variables. Furthermore, in Section 4.4, we discuss specific choices of spectral transformations
10

Spectral Deconfounding

and verify that the Trim transform (3.3), as well as Lava and PCA adjustment, can be used
in order to achieve this error rate.
We assume first for simplicity that we are in the high-dimensional case, where p ≥ n.
However, the theory developed in this section also holds for the case n > p with small
adjustments. We discuss the case n > p in more details in Section 4.5.
4.1 Notation
√

φM :=

αT M α
,
kαk1 ≤5kαS k1 √1 kαS k1
s
inf

where S is the support set of β, s is the size of S and αS is a vector consisting only of the
components of α which are in S.
Let us also write Σ̃ := n1 X̃ T X̃, and Σ̂ := n1 X T X. We denote the k-th largest diagonal
element of the transformed singular values D̃ by d˜(k) . We denote the the largest, the smallest
and i-th (non-zero) singular value of any rectangular matrix A by λmax (A), λmin (A) and
(A)
λi (A) respectively. The condition number is defined as cond(A) = λλmax
.
min (A)
Finally, we use the notation A = Ω(B) if B
A = O(1), i.e. if A has asymptotically at least
the same rate as B and A  B if A and B have asymptotically the same rate. A = Op (B)
means that there exists a constant c > 0 such that P(A > cB) → 0 and Ωp is defined
analogously.
4.2 Main result for the confounding model
We present here the main result for the confounding model (2.1), which we derive below
by considering the relationship with the corresponding perturbed linear model, as described
in Section 2.
Theorem 1 Consider the model in (2.1) with maxi Σii = O(1) and cond(ΣE ) = O(1) and
suppose that λmin (Σ) is bounded away from zero. Assume that the model satisfies
√
(A1) λmin (Γ) = λmin (Cov(X, H)) = Ω( p).
Assume additionally that a spectral transformation F in (3.1) with λmax (F ) = 1 satisfies
√
(A2) λmax (X̃) = Op ( p)
(A3) φ2Σ̃ = Ωp (λmin (Σ)).
Then for the penalty level λ  σ
error has the following rate:

q

log p
n , despite the confounding variables, the `1 -estimation

kβ̂ − βk1 = Op

σs
λmin (Σ)

r

log p
n

!
.

The assumption (A1) means that the confounding is dense in the sense that each
√
confounding variable is correlated with many predictors: The condition λmin (Γ) = Ωp ( p)
11

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

is satisfied, for example, if pq → 0 and Γ is drawn at random with either rows or columns
of Γ being independent, identically distributed sub-Gaussian random vectors, as shown in
Lemma 1.
We also show in Section 4.4 that certain choices of the spectral transformation, such
as the Trim transform (3.3) with τ = dbtnc , where t ∈ (0, 1) is an arbitrary constant, or
the PCA adjustment, which maps first several singular values to zero, satisfy with high
probability the conditions (A2) and (A3) in the high-dimensional setting under certain
conditions.
4.3 `1 -estimation error of β in the perturbed linear model
In this section we derive an upper bound for the `1 -estimation error of β in the perturbed
linear model and show that we can achieve the usual Lasso error rate in the high-dimensional
case, provided the perturbation b is sufficiently small. Then the main theorem for the
confounding model, Theorem 1, follows from Corollary 1 by using the relationship between
the models described in Section 2.
The following result describes the effect of an arbitrary linear transformation F on the
`1 -estimation error of the Lasso:
Theorem 2 Assume the model in (2.3) with maxi Σii = O(1). Let F ∈ Rn×n be an arbitrary
linear transformation and A > 0 an arbitrary fixed constant.
q Then for the method described

in (3.1) with transformation F and penalty level λ = Aσ

log p
2
n λmax (F ) , with probability at

2

least 1 − 2p1−A /(32 maxi Σii ) − pe−n/136 , we have
kβ̂ − βk1 ≤ C1

sλ
kX̃bk22
+
C
,
2
nλ
φ2Σ̃

where C1 , C2 are constants depending only on A.
Remark 3 One can get a better bound
kβ̂ − βk1 ≤ C1

√
sλ
s kX̃bk2
√
+
C
2
φΣ̃
n
φ2Σ̃

by taking larger penalty λ than the one above, but then λ depends on the unknown quantity
kX̃bk2 . For that reason we will use the bound above with standard penalty level λ, since it
does not matter when kX̃bk2 is small, which holds in our case, as shown later.
The first term is the standard bound for the `1 -error of the Lasso, with only difference
T
T
that the compatibility constant is for the matrix Σ̃ = X̃ n X̃ rather than the matrix Σ̂ = X n X .
The second term shows the dependence of the error on the term X̃b. It is also worth noting
that the penalty λ has standard form up to the scaling correction factor λmax (F )2 , which
equals 1 for the Trim transform and the PCA adjustment.
In order to control the error caused by the coefficient perturbation b, we need to make
kX̃bk2 small by shrinking the singular values enough, e.g. by ensuring that d˜(1) , the largest
singular value after transformation, is small. On the other hand, we must not shrink the
12

Spectral Deconfounding

singular values too much, since we need φΣ̃ to stay large. If we have that φ2Σ̃ is bounded
away from 0 with high probability, as it is the case with φ2Σ̂ (see Bühlmann and van de Geer
(2011)), and that kX̃bk2 is sufficiently small, we get from Theorem 2 that our estimator
achieves the usual Lasso error rate:
Corollary 1 Consider the model in (2.3) with maxi Σii = O(1) and suppose that λmin (Σ)
is bounded away from zero. For the coefficient perturbation b as in (2.4), assume that
 2

(A1’) kbk22 = O sσ plog p .
Assume additionally that the spectral transformation F in (3.1) with λmax (F ) = 1 satisfies
√
(A2) λmax (X̃) = Op ( p)
(A3) φ2Σ̃ = Ωp (λmin (Σ)).
Then for the penalty level λ  σ
error has the following rate:

q

log p
n , despite the coefficient perturbation, the `1 -estimation

σs
λmin (Σ)

kβ̂ − βk1 = Op

r

log p
n

!
.

We show in the following section that in the perturbed linear model that arises from the
confounding model (2.1), the induced coefficient perturbation b, given in (2.4), satisfies the
condition (A1’), provided that the dense confounding assumption (A1) is satisfied. We also
show that certain spectral transformations, such as the Trim transform (3.3) with τ = dbtnc ,
where t ∈ (0, 1) is an arbitrary constant, or the PCA adjustment satisfy the conditions (A2)
and (A3) under certain conditions.
Remark 4 (Fixed design) The results of Theorem 2 and Corollary 1 can be easily extended to the perturbed linear model with fixed design. One can even relax the assumption
(A1’) to a weaker condition
kV

T

bk22 = O



sσ 2 log p
p


.

It is worth noting that if the perturbation vector b has uniformly random direction, which is
not the case with the confounding model (2.1),
much weaker than the condition
 2this becomes

2
sσ log p
(A1’) above and we only require kbk2 = O
.
n
4.4 Validity of the assumptions
In this section we will justify the assumptions in Theorem 1 and Corollary 1 for certain
spectral transformations F , with an emphasis on the Trim transform (3.3) and the PCA adjustment. We also discuss later the performance of other choices of spectral transformations.
13

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

Assumptions (A1) and (A1’)
The assumption (A1’) for the perturbed linear model says that the coefficient perturbation must not be too large. It can also be viewed as the condition which makes
the perturbed linear model identifiable, since in general it is impossible to distinguish the
true coefficient vector β from the
p perturbed coefficient vector β + b, unless b has some
additional structure. The rate O( sσ 2 log p/p) may seem too strict, but this is the rate with
respect to p
the `2 -norm, so if the perturbation vector is dense, this becomes approximately
kbk1 = O( sσ 2 log p).
The following lemma shows that if the confounding is dense in the confounding model
(the assumption (A1) holds), then the induced coefficient perturbation in the underlying
perturbed linear model is small (the assumption (A1’) holds). It is important to note that
certain dense confounding assumption is necessary. The term Xb can be thought of as the
part of the confounding Hδ that can be explained by X and if, as an extreme example, the
confounder Hi is correlated with only the predictor Xj , only the j-th component of X will
be useful for describing the effect of Hi on Y and thus bj will be very large and we will not
be able to estimate βj .
Lemma
1 Assume that the confounding model (2.1) satisfies λmin (Γ) = λmin (Cov(H, X)) =
√ 
Ω p and cond(ΣE ) = O(1). Then we have:
kδk22
=O
kbk22 = kCov(X)−1 Cov(X, H)δk22 ≤ cond(ΣE ) ·
λmin (Γ)2

kδk22
p

!


=O

σ2
p



√
The condition λmin (Γ) = Ωp ( p) is satisfied, for example, if pq → 0 and Γ is drawn at random
with either its rows or columns being independent, identically distributed sub-Gaussian random
variables with expectation 0 and covariance matrix ΣΓ , with λmin (ΣΓ ) bounded away from
zero.
From this we see that it is important that the effect of the latent variables is spread out
over many predictors. If this is not true, λmin (Γ) will be too small and thus kbk2 will be too
large.
Assumption (A2)
We investigate quickly the behaviour of singular values of X in order to see whether the
assumption (A2) holds for the transformed matrix X̃. This assumption says that after the
transformation, the largest singular value is not too large.
In the confounding model we have Σ = ΓT Γ + ΣE , i.e. the covariance matrix of X has
additional low-rank component ΓT Γ, which causes the top several singular values of Σ to be
very large. Since the rows of X are drawn from a distribution with covariance matrix Σ,
the first few singular values of X will be large as well (Donoho et al., 2013). However, the
following lemma shows that the bulk of the singular values will never be too large, i.e. they
√
will be of order p. The assumption (A2) requires the transformed singular values to be of
this order.

14

Spectral Deconfounding

Lemma 2 Assume that X ∈ Rn×p is a random matrix whose rows are i.i.d. sub-Gaussian
vectors with covariance
p matrix Σ. Let d1 , . . . , dr ≥ 0 be its singular values. Assume also that
Tr(Σ)  p and that log p/n → 0. We have:
r

1X 2
di = Tr(Σ)(1 + op (1)).
n
i=1

√
Furthermore, when p > n, dbtnc = Op ( p) for any t ∈ (0, 1).
For the Trim transform the largest singular value after transformation d˜(1) equals the
trimming threshold τ and the above lemma shows that τ = dbtnc for t ∈ (0, 1), e.g. the
median singular value when t = 0.5, is a good choice and the assumption (A2) holds.
If we further assume that ΣE has bounded singular values, thus ensuring the gap between
the q-th and (q + 1)-st eigenvalues of Σ, we get that all but the first q singular values of X
will not be too large, thus justifying the assumption (A2) for the PCA adjustment, since
there we have λmax (X̃) = d˜(1) = d˜q+1 = dq+1 .
Lemma 3 Assume that p > n and that X has i.i.d. sub-Gaussian rows with covariance
√
matrix Σ = ΓT Γ + ΣE , where Γ ∈ Rq×p and λmax (ΣE ) = O(1), then we have dq+1 = Op ( p).
This lemma also shows that in this case the trimming threshold τ for the Trim transform
can be chosen to be τ = dq+1 , but τ = dbtnc might be a better choice as the number of
confounders q is unknown.
Assumption (A3)
This assumption says that the compatibility constant φΣ̂ does not substantially decrease
after applying our transformation F . We want to show that by shrinking the singular values
we have not shrunk our signal Xβ too much. Intuitively, this means that the active set XS
is not too aligned with the directions along which we substantially shrink, which corresponds
to the first several singular vectors in the case of Trim transform and PCA adjustment.
It is difficult to bound φΣ̃ for an arbitrary spectral transformation F , since the distribution
of the singular vectors V of the design matrix X is complicated. However, one can directly
exploit the results from the factor analysis literature (Bai, 2003) for the PCA adjustment,
from which it follows that in a certain asymptotic regime the transformed design matrix X̃
is close to the unconfounded design matrix E. Using this result, one can directly obtain
the compatibility condition (A3) for the PCA adjustment by using the standard argument
(Bühlmann and van de Geer, 2011).
Lemma 4 Let X be generated from the confounding model (2.1) and let FPbe a spectral
transformation shrinking the first q singular values of X to 0. If q is fixed, p1 pi,j=1 |(ΣE )ij |
log p
upper bounded and n sp
min(n,p) → 0, we have that, with probability converging to 1, the

compatibility condition holds for the transformed design matrix X̃ = F X:
φ21
n

p

X̃ T X̃

→ φ21

T
nE E

= Ωp (λmin (ΣE )) .

15

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

In the Appendix A.1 the analysis of the compatibility constant φΣ̃ is provided under the
somewhat restrictive assumption that the singular vectors V have uniformly distributed
direction, but allowing for a more high-dimensional asymptotic regime than in the Lemma 4.
Since the ratio of the transformed singular values for the Trim transform and PCA
τ
adjustment is bounded from below by dq+1
, the compatibility constant φTrim for the Trim
transform can be bounded from below by the compatibility constant φPCA for the PCA
adjustment:
d

τ
φTrim ≥ dq+1
φPCA = dbtnc
φPCA
q+1

and thus the compatibility condition holds for the Trim transform as well if dq+1 and
√
d
τ = dbtnc are of comparable sizes, i.e. dbtnc
= Ωp (1). By Lemma 3, we have dq+1 = Op ( p)
q+1
and by the following lemma it holds that for quite a wide range of settings we also have
that d2btnc = Ωp (λmin (Σ)p). Therefore, Lemma 4 can be used for showing the compatibility
condition for the Trim transform as well.
Lemma 5 Assume that X is a random design matrix with i.i.d. rows with covariance
matrix Σ and suppose p > n. Assume that any of the following conditions is satisfied:
i) the rows of X have a sub-Gaussian distribution and np → ∞
ii) the rows of X have a N (0, Σ) distribution and lim inf np > 1
iii) the rows of X have N (0, Σ) distribution and lim sup nk < 1
Then we have
d2k = Ωp (λmin (Σ)p).
Performance of various spectral transformations
The result of Theorem 1 can be applied to any spectral transformation that satisfies
the assumptions (A2) and (A3). We discuss here which spectral transformations satisfy
them and what are their possible advantages and disadvantages for the performance of the
corresponding estimator β̂. The illustration of the spectral transformations discussed below
is given in Figure 4.1.
PCA adjustment As shown above, under certain assumptions we get that the spectral
transformation which maps first q singular values to 0 will satisfy assumptions (A2) and
(A3). Even though it might seem that one disadvantage of this method is that the number of
confounding variables q needs to be estimated from the data, one can show that asymptotically
it can be done accurately with high probability (Bai, 2003). PCA adjustment leaves most of
the singular values intact, so the increase in the estimator variance will not be large.
Lasso The simplest option is to take d˜i = di , i.e. the usual Lasso algorithm without any
transformation. Standard Lasso theory shows that the assumption (A3) is satisfied (see
Bühlmann and van de Geer (2011)). However, (A2) requires that the largest singular value
√
of X is of order O( p), which typically does not hold in presence of confounding variables.
16

Spectral Deconfounding

Figure 4.1: Singular values of X̃ after applying spectral transformations corresponding to
different methods to 40 × 60 matrix X with i.i.d. standard normal entries.

Trim transform As shown above, we have that the Trim transform satisfies assumptions
(A2) and (A3) if we take the trimming threshold to be τ = dbtnc for some t ∈ (0, 1), e.g.
the median singular value. Compared to the PCA adjustment, it has an advantage that one
does not need to estimate the number of confounding variables from the data. Moreover,
it does not shrink first several singular values to 0, but only to the necessary level. This
more gradual shrinkage might lead to better performance especially if the signal Xβ is more
aligned with the first few singular vectors.
q
√
Lava The mapping di → nλ2 di / nλ2 + d2i used in the Lava algorithm (Chernozhukov
et al., 2017) satisfies the conditions (A2) and (A3) as well, since the transformed singular
values d˜i are quite close to the ones for the Trim transform d˜i = min(di , τ ), for an appropriate
17

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

choice of τ :

√
p
p
nλ2 di
1
≤ min(di , nλ2 ).
min(di , nλ2 ) ≤ q
2
nλ + d2
2

i

This also reveals how to choose the penalty λ2 in Lava: λ2 = n1 d2bmin(n,p)/2c and λ1 can
be chosen by cross-validation. This transformation has the property that it is smoother
than the Trim transform. We note that with this comment and Corollary 1, we have
established the standard Lasso `1 -error rate for Lava for estimating the sparse parameter
β in a high-dimensional regression model; such result is not given in Chernozhukov et al.
(2017).
Puffer transformation For the Puffer transform (Jia et al., 2015), where we map all
singular values to a constant dn (because of homogeneity it does not matter to which constant
we map it, but we have assumed w.l.o.g. that d˜i ≤ di , so we need to map them to dn ), the
assumption (A2) is easily satisfied. However, for (A3) we need to have d2n = Ωp (λmin (Σ) p).
From Vershynin (2010), we have that this holds only if lim inf np > 1, i.e. the Puffer transform
will not work well if n and p are close.
Step function The justification of the assumptions (A2) and (A3) for Trim transform
apply as well for the step function d˜i = τ 1(di > τ ) with the same threshold τ . However,
unnecessarily shrinking singular values might cause worse performance than for the Trim
transform.
4.5 Low dimensional case: n > p
The statement of Theorem 2 still holds in the low-dimensional case n > p. However,

√
2
1
n kX̃bk2 will now be of larger order than λ. We have that λmax (X̃) = Op ( n), compared
√
to p before (see Lemma 2), which under the assumption (A1’) gives us that n1 kX̃bk22 =
2
O(kbk22 ) = O( sσ plog p ). Therefore, the second term in the bound of Theorem 2 will be too

large in comparison with the first term.
Fortunately, from the remark below Theorem 2, we see that by taking larger λ, we can
decrease the rate of the second term. If the perturbation term n1 kX̃bk2 gets larger than the
standard penalty rate, as it is the case when n > p, it is better to penalize more. One gets
in this case:
!
r
√
skbk2
sσ
log p
kβ̂ − βk1 = Op
+p
λmin (Σ)
n
λmin (Σ)
which by Lemma 1 in the confounding model, under the dense confounding assumption
(A1), becomes:
!
r
√
log p
sσ
sσ
kβ̂ − βk1 = OP
+p
.
√
λmin (Σ)
n
λmin (Σ) p
One can not expect the same error rate as in the high-dimensional setting, since this
would imply that, for fixed p, the error converges to 0 as n → ∞ which can not happen
because the error is not only due to the randomness of the sample data, but also due to
the coefficient perturbation b. The perturbation b only depends on how the confounding
18

Spectral Deconfounding

variables affect the predictors and not on the number of data points and thus one can not
expect consistency for a fixed p. However, we see that the estimator is consistent when
n, p → ∞. The more predictors we have, the more is the effect of the confounding variables
spread out.
This is also illustrated in Figure 4.2, where we can see that even though the error
decreases as we increase the number of data points, it still seems to have a nonzero limit.
However, the error is small, especially in comparison with the standard Lasso, and there is a
benefit in using our method.

Figure 4.2: Dependence of the estimation error kβ̂ − βk1 on the sample size n for different spectral transformations and data generated from the confounding model,
including the case p < n, as described in Section 5.1.1.

5. Empirical Results
We present here some empirical results for simulated and real data.
5.1 Simulations
We demonstrate the performance of various spectral transformations for estimating the
coefficient vector β with a subsequent use of the Lasso: Trim transform, Lava, Puffer and
PCA adjustment. We investigate the cases when the perturbation b arises from hidden
confounding and when it is randomly sampled.
19

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

5.1.1 Setting
2 I , where
We generate the data from the confounding model (2.1). We take ΣE = σE
p
σE = 2 and β = (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, . . . , 0), so s = 5. For a fixed number q of hidden confounders,
we sample the coefficients Γij and δi independently as standard normal random variables.
By default, we take q = 6. Unless stated otherwise, we use the noise level σ = 1 as the
standard deviation of . Finally, the sample size is set to be n = 200 and the dimensionality
of the predictors is p = 600 as the default value. All results are based on N = 212 = 4096
independent simulations.
It is also interesting to consider the perturbed linear model (2.3). We do not generate
data from this model directly, but we will modify the underlying perturbation term b which
is implicit in the confounding model by formula (2.4). This way we can compare the results
obtained for the confounding model and the perturbed linear model directly with each other.
We replace b by Qb where Q is a random rotation matrix so that the new perturbation has
the same size, but with uniformly random direction. We note that the resulting distribution
is the same as of the perturbed linear model (2.3), where rows of X are drawn from N (0, Σ),
where Σ = ΓT Γ + Ip , and b is drawn uniformly from a ball of radius k(ΓT Γ + Ip )−1 ΓT δk2 .

5.1.2 Choosing λ
In practice we encounter the problem of choosing the penalty level λ for the Lasso after
applying a spectral transformation. The results of Theorem
q 1 and Corollary 1 give us that

one can use the standard theoretical penalty rate λ  σ logn p to get the desired error rate
of our estimator. In practice one often resorts to using cross-validation (CV) for choosing
the penalty parameter rather than using the theoretical value, especially since σ is unknown.

Figure 5.1: Dependence of the estimation error kβ̂ − βk1 on the number of predictors p
for different spectral transformations and data generated from the confounding
model (2.1), as described in Section 5.1.1. In the left plot, the penalty is chosen
by cross-validation, whereas in the right plot we use the oracle value for which
the estimation error is minimal.

20

Spectral Deconfounding

However, one needs to be careful in presence of confounding variables; in this case the
coefficient vector β + b describes the data better than β, which we are trying to recover.
Therefore, cross-validation tends to choose a smaller value of λ than the optimal for recovering
β. This is illustrated in the Figure 5.1, where we see that, for example, the Puffer transform
is significantly affected by this choice of λ. For recovering β in practice, it might be better
to increase slightly the value of λ chosen by cross-validation (Janzing and Schölkopf, 2018).
But on the other hand, smaller λ gives us a larger set of variables, which might be beneficial
for variable screening.
In all simulations, unless stated otherwise, the penalty level is chosen by cross-validation.
This choice does not seem to worsen the performance of the Trim transform or Lava a lot,
as one can see in Figure 5.1 and Figure 5.5, and it is of great practical importance since the
oracle value of λ, i.e. the one for which kβ̂λ − βk1 is smallest, can not be directly determined
from the data.
5.1.3 Results
Here we present the results of the simulations for both the confounding model and the
perturbed linear model. A fundamental difference between them is that the coefficient
perturbation arising from the confounding model is pointing towards the singular vectors
of X corresponding to the large singular values (see Figure 3.1). This makes kXbk2 larger
for a fixed kbk2 , and in this case the estimation error will be larger. On the other hand, in
this case we can improve our accuracy more compared to the plain Lasso by shrinking large
singular values, as will be shown below.

Figure 5.2: Dependence of the estimation error kβ̂ − βk1 on the size of the noise for different
spectral transformations for confounding model (left) and the perturbed linear
model (right), as described in Section 5.1.1.

Noise versus perturbation In the left plot in Figure 5.2 we can see how the estimation
error changes depending on the size of the noise σ in the confounding model. When σ is
21

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

small, the perturbation b has the biggest effect on the error. On the other hand, if σ is large,
then the influence of the perturbation b becomes less pronounced.
We can see that the standard Lasso is affected a lot by the coefficient perturbation,
whereas the Puffer transform and the PCA adjustment are affected more by the additive
noise than the Lava and the Trim transform, since the slopes of the corresponding curves
are steeper. The higher variance of the Puffer transform is most evident in Figure 4.2 and
Figure 5.1; when n, p are close to each other, some of the singular values of X become quite
small and thus mapping them to a constant can inflate the error  in the corresponding
directions by a lot. We can observe that the oracle PCA adjustment, which removes exactly
the q largest singular values of X, works well, especially when σ is small. For larger σ, we
see that Trim transform and Lava work slightly better since they do not remove that much
of the signal.
In the right plot of Figure 5.2, we have randomized the direction of b while keeping
everything else constant, as described in Section 5.1.1. This then corresponds to a model
with random perturbation b, but no specific further structure in terms of confounding. We
can see a substantial improvement of the standard Lasso: in hindsight this shows that the
Lasso is very sensitive to confounding variables but much less so to perturbation of sparsity.
Also, it is worth noting that the PCA adjustment method is now consistently worse than
the Trim transform or Lava, since the projection of b onto the span of the first q singular
vectors is not that large anymore.

Figure 5.3: Dependence of the estimation error on the size of the perturbation vector b for
different spectral transformation for the perturbed linear model, as described in
Section 5.1.1.
We can see more clearly the bias-variance tradeoff for different spectral transformations
in Figure 5.3, where we have taken the rotated coefficient perturbation b, as in the right
plot of Figure 5.2 and then artificially scaled it by a chosen constant. For a very small b,
we see that Puffer and PCA adjustment have somewhat worse performance. As b increases,
Trim transform and Lava reduce the bias caused by b much better than the Lasso. We can
22

Spectral Deconfounding

also see that the PCA adjustment does not reduce the bias as much, but its performance
would be significantly better if b was not rotated, but aligned with the top several principal
components as in the confounding model, see Figure 5.2.
Number of confounding variables In Figure 5.4 we can see how the estimation error
depends on the number q of confounding variables. As above, we see that the Lasso is
severely affected by the presence of confounding variables. The Puffer transform performs
reasonably well since n and p are different enough and the Trim transform and Lava exhibit
similar and good performance in all cases.
PCA adjustment works well for the confounding model if we correctly guess the number
of confounding variables. In the left plot in Figure 5.4 we can clearly see how the estimation
error is affected by the misspecification of the number of the principal components we
remove. The oracle PCA method, which removes exactly q principal components, performs
reasonably well, particularly for smaller values of q. However, if we overestimate or especially
if we underestimate the number of confounding variables, the estimation error will become
significantly worse compared to the Trim transform or Lava.

Figure 5.4: Dependence of the estimation error kβ̂ − βk1 on the number of confounding
variables for different spectral transformation for confounding model (left) and
the perturbed linear model (right) as described in Section 5.1.1.

Method robustness We are interested in whether there are any disadvantages in using
the spectral transformations if we wrongly think that there is some hidden confounding or
that the sparse coefficient has been perturbed.
In Figure 5.5 we display the estimation error for the confounding model as in Figure 5.4,
but where the coefficient bias b has been set to 0, i.e. this is a standard sparse linear model
with X being generated from the spiked covariance model.
There is no indication for relevant differences between the performances of the Trim
transform, Lava and the Lasso. The Lasso performs slightly better for larger values of q and
slightly worse for smaller q. It is worth noting that on this plot the estimation error starts
23

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

to decrease as q increases, which is due to a scaling issue. This happens because the variance
of X increases as q increases, since Σ = ΓT Γ + ΣE , thus effectively increasing the signal to
noise ratio. PCA adjustment seems to be affected most by the choice of λ, especially for
larger q since its shrinkage is larger in this case, see Figure 5.5. With the oracle choice of
the penalty level, its performance is very similar to the performance of the Lasso.
Our empirical results support theoretical evidence, which showed that it is safe to use
wisely chosen spectral transformations such as the Trim transform or the Lava. If there are
any confounding variables present, there is a large improvement over the standard Lasso.
On the other hand, if there are no confounding variables, the Trim transform or Lava will
have about the same performance as the Lasso. Therefore, our method can be thought of as
an easy to use modification of the Lasso which is robust to hidden confounding.

Figure 5.5: Size of the estimation error kβ̂ −βk1 for a sparse linear model where Σ = ΓT Γ+Ip ,
i.e. the confounding model with the induced perturbation b set to b = 0. The
penalty level λ is either chosen by cross-validation (left) or taken to be the oracle
value, which minimizes the `1 -error (right).

5.2 Application to genomic dataset
In this section we demonstrate the robustness of our method against hidden confounders
on a real genomic dataset where we have certain knowledge about the confounding variables.
We inspect various spectral transformations in combination with the Lasso and evaluate the
differences between the estimates for the original data set and the one where the confounding
variables have been adjusted for.
5.2.1 Gene expression dataset
We have obtained data from the GTEx Portal (http://gtexportal.org). The GTEx
project provides large-scale data with an aim to help the scientific community to study
gene expression, gene regulation and their relationship to genetic variation. It provides gene
24

Spectral Deconfounding

expression data from 11,688 samples collected postmortem from 53 different tissues of 714
human donors.
Gene expression is a process in the cell in which the information stored in a certain gene
is used for the synthesis of gene products such as proteins. In the GTEx Project it was
quantified by the amount of the mRNA in the cell which was created from this gene. Gene
expression differs among different people and among different cells within the human body.
The type of the cells is determined by the gene expression within them; even though the
DNA in all cell nuclei is the same, cells in different tissues behave and look differently and
perform significantly different tasks. Gene expression is also affected by the genetic variation
and determining the expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL), which are parts of genome
which explain the variation in the gene expression, is a very important problem which will
help to understand the relationship between genetic variation and different phenotypes.
5.2.2 Setting
We use the fully processed, filtered and normalized gene expression matrix for the skeletal
muscle tissue. We consider the gene expression of p = 140 713 protein-coding genes measured
from n = 491 samples. For our purpose, an important aspect of this dataset is that there
are also q = 65 different covariates provided, which are proxies for the hidden confounding
variables. They include genotyping principal components and PEER factors. We can thus
obtain the deconfounded data by regressing out these given covariates.
The left panel of Figure 5.6 displays the singular values of the initial data matrix. We
see that the first several singular values are substantially larger than the rest which suggests
a possible existence of hidden confounders. In the right part of Figure 5.6 we can see the
singular values of the deconfounded data matrix where we have regressed out all of the
q = 65 covariates which are provided as confounding proxies.

Figure 5.6: Singular values of the gene expression data matrix for skeletal muscle tissue
before (left) and after (right) regressing out the provided q = 65 confounding
covariates.

25

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

We are going to explore now the robustness of the Lasso, Trim transform, and Lava
against hidden confounders by comparing the estimates based on the original and the
deconfounded data. For a fixed value of k, we regress out first k given confounder proxies
from the original gene expression data matrix X in order to get the matrix X (k) and we
randomly choose one column to represent the response Y . We are thus trying to explain the
expression of one gene by the expressions of other genes.
For every s = 1, . . . , 20, we apply the given method on X and X (k) with the regularization
λ chosen as the largest value such that the support size of β̂ equals a prespecified value
(k)
s. This leads to estimates β̂s and β̂s . We measure the dissimilarity of the corresponding
(k)
supports by J(supp β̂s , supp β̂s ), where J is the Jaccard distance:
J(A, B) =

A4B
.
A∪B

Figure 5.7: Jaccard distance of the supports of the estimates based on the original and
deconfounded data for one randomly chosen response (top left). Jaccard distance,
averaged over 500 randomly chosen responses, of the supports of estimates based
on the original data and data with 5 (top right), 15 (bottom left) and 65 (bottom
right) confounder proxies removed.

26

Spectral Deconfounding

5.2.3 Results
In the top left image in Figure 5.7, we can see the difference of the estimates for the
original and the deconfounded data, where 5 randomly chosen confounding variables have
been removed and the response Y is the expression of a randomly chosen gene. We can
see that the Jaccard distance for the Lasso is closer to 1, indicating that the estimated
support sets are very different and almost disjoint; The Trim transform and Lava are much
more robust to the hidden confounders and we see that the Jaccard distance between the
estimates based on confounded and deconfounded data is much smaller.
In order to make sure that the choice of response Y did not affect the results, we have
repeated this experiment for 500 randomly chosen genes and averaged the obtained results.
The results are also displayed in Figure 5.7. We can see that, as we increase the number
k of confounding variables which we regress out, the Jaccard distance for all methods is
increasing. This is to be expected since X (k) and X are becoming more different as we
increase k. However, we can infer that the Trim transform and Lava are consistently better
than the Lasso, exhibiting also in this real dataset the robustness against confounding
variables.

6. Discussion
We propose to add robustness against hidden confounding variables by employing a
wisely chosen spectral transformation before using the Lasso or other high-dimensional
sparse regression techniques. There is essentially nothing to lose but much to be gained
which is in line with the typical argument of robustness (Huber, 2011) We can also take
directly the viewpoint of deconfounding before performing further analysis: this is the more
common thinking in many applications where hidden confounding is expected to happen, a
prime example being genetics (Novembre and Stephens, 2008).
The confounding issue in the context of linear models can be represented and analyzed as
a regression problem with coefficient β + b; the coefficient β is the true underlying parameter
in absence of confounding variables, while the perturbation b is due to the confounding.
We develop theory for a linear model with regression parameters β + b where β is sparse
and the perturbation b sufficiently small, a condition satisfied when the confounding is
sufficiently ’dense’ in the sense that each confounding variable affects many predictors.
We show that certain spectral transformations, such as the Trim transform or the PCA
adjustment, in conjunction with using the Lasso afterwards, achieve the same `1 -convergence
rate of the kβ̂ − βk1 as the Lasso for the linear model without confounding; see Section 4
and Theorem 1. Such a theoretical result is entirely new and covers also the Lava method
(Chernozhukov et al., 2017). As a consequence, the theoretical result also establishes spectral
deconfounding as an excellent method for removing the effect of dense hidden confounders
in high-dimensional settings.
Another advantage of our approach is its simplicity: it consists of just one simple pretransformation step before using the Lasso. It requires the computation of the SVD of the
design matrix which has computational complexity of O(min(n2 p, np2 )) and can be done in
a few lines of code.
The topic of deconfounding has not received too much attention, despite its practical
importance (Greenland et al., 1999; Brookhart et al., 2010). Here we have shown that it is
27

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

possible and easy to protect against hidden dense confounding in the case of linear regression.
Similar ideas might be powerful as well for more complicated models.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Gian Thanei and Benjamin Frot for providing processed data for
our biological applications.

Appendix A.
A.1 Compatibility condition after transformation
We discuss here in more detail the assumption (A3), which is the compatibility condition
(Bühlmann and van de Geer, 2011) for the transformed design matrix X̃.
This assumption means that the compatibility constant φΣ̂ does not substantially decrease
after applying our transformation F . Intuitively, we want to show that by transforming the
singular values, we have not shrunk our signal Xβ too much. For Trim transform and PCA
adjustment, this means that the active set XS is not aligned too much with the direction of
the singular vectors corresponding to the large singular values, since those are the directions
along which we are substantially shrinking.
In order to proceed, we need to understand how exactly φΣ̃ depends on the transformed
singular values in D̃. The answer to this question depends delicately on the singular vectors V
of X as well. The following bound helps us to understand the behaviour of the compatibility
constant depending on the transformed singular values.
Lemma 6 Consider an arbitrary spectral transformation F as in (3.2). Let 1 ≤ k < r =
min(n, p) be an arbitrary integer. Then:
φ2Σ̃ ≥

r
X
1
i=1

1
d˜2 (φ2 − φ2Mi−1 ) ≥ d˜2(k) φ2Mk ,
n (i) Mi
n



T
where Mk = V(1) , . . . , V(k) V(1) , . . . , V(k) .
We can use Lemma 6 for the Trim transform with k = btnc or the PCA adjustment
where we map q̂ = o(k) singular values to 0. Then it suffices to show that d˜2(k) and φ2Mk are
sufficiently large in order to show (A3). This means that certain proportion of the singular
√
values is still large (of order p) after shrinking, and that the direction of the corresponding
singular vectors is not too unfavourable.
The Lemma 5 from the main part of the paper shows that for quite a wide range of
settings we have that d2btnc = Ωp (λmin (Σ)p), which means that after applying the Trim
transform with τ = dbtnc , or the PCA adjustment which shrinks o(n) singular values to zero,
 
we still have d˜2
= Ωp (λmin (Σ)p). It therefore suffices to show that φ2
= Ωp n in
Mbtnc

(btnc)

p

order to show (A3) from Lemma 6. This is not simple to show, as distribution of V is quite
complicated for general Σ = Cov(X), but this always holds under the uniformity condition
described in the next lemma.
28

Spectral Deconfounding

Lemma 7 If p > n and V has a uniform distribution on the Stiefel manifold, then for any
k = Ω(n), we have
 
n
2
.
φMk = Ωp
p
This uniformity assumption is sensible to make since it will be true under any of the two
following scenarios: the first is that the components of X are i.i.d. normal random variables;
the second is that the singular vectors of Σ have the uniform distribution on the space of
orthogonal matrices themselves. This, for example, might happen in the confounding model
2 I and the rows of Γ have rotationally invariant distribution, i.e.
(2.1), when Cov(E) = σE
p
ΓQ has the same distribution as Γ for any orthogonal matrix Q ∈ Rp×p .
The uniformity assumption is sufficient, but not necessary for the assumption (A3) to
hold. In the main part it was shown to hold in a certain asymptotic regime for the Trim
transform and PCA adjustment. We believe however that the compatibility condition holdS
in a very broad range of asymptotic regimes.
A.2 Proofs
Here we provide the proofs of all results stated in this paper.
Theorem 2 Assume the model in (2.3) with maxi Σii = O(1). Let F ∈ Rn×n be an arbitrary
linear transformation and A > 0 an arbitrary fixed constant.
q Then for the method described

in (3.1) with transformation F and penalty level λ = Aσ

log p
2
n λmax (F ) , with probability at

2

least 1 − 2p1−A /(32 maxi Σii ) − pe−n/136 , we have
kβ̂ − βk1 ≤ C1

sλ
kX̃bk22
+
C
,
2
nλ
φ2Σ̃

where C1 , C2 are constants depending only on A.
Proof Denote by β 0 the true coefficient vector.
Since β̂ minimizes n1 kỸ − X̃βk22 + λkβk1 , we have:
1
1
kỸ − X̃ β̂k22 + λkβ̂k1 ≤ kỸ − X̃β 0 k22 + λkβ 0 k1
n
n
1
2
0 2
kX̃(β̂ − β )k2 + λkβ̂k1 ≤ (Ỹ − X̃β 0 )T X̃(β̂ − β 0 ) + λkβ 0 k1
n
n
2
2
≤ ˜T X̃(β̂ − β 0 ) + bT X̃ T X̃(β̂ − β 0 ) + λkβ 0 k1
n
n
1
2 T
1
0
2
0
kX̃(β̂ − β − b)k2 + λkβ̂k1 ≤ ˜ X̃(β̂ − β ) + kX̃bk22 + λkβ 0 k1
n
n
n
2

Let us work on the event {k n2 X̃ T ˜k∞ ≤ τ }, which has probability at least 1−2p1−A /(32 maxi Σii ) −pe−n/136
q
1
2
for τ = λ/2 = 2 Aσ log(p)
n λmax (F ) , as it is shown in Lemma 8. On this event we have
2 T
2
˜ X̃(β̂ − β 0 ) ≤ kX̃ T ˜k∞ kβ̂ − β 0 k1 ≤ τ kβ̂ − β 0 k1
n
n
29

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

from Hölder’s inequality. We now have:
1
1
kX̃(β̂ − β 0 − b)k22 + λkβ̂k1 ≤ τ kβ̂ − β 0 k1 + kX̃bk22 + λkβ 0 k1
n
n
By using that βS0 c = 0, we get that
1
kX̃(β̂ − β 0 − b)k22 + (λ − τ )kβ̂S c − βS0 c k1
n
≤ τ kβ̂S − βS0 k1 + λkβS0 k1 − λkβ̂S k1 +
≤ (λ + τ )kβ̂S − βS0 k1 +
Let us now write
φΣ̃ (L, S) =

1
kX̃bk22
n

1
kX̃bk22
n

q
β T Σ̃β

>0
min
β∈R(L,S) √1 kβS k1
s

where R(L, S) = {x : kxS c k1 ≤ LkxS k1 }
We consider two cases:
• Case 1: n1 kX̃bk22 ≤ λkβ̂S − βS0 k1
• Case 2: n1 kX̃bk22 ≥ λkβ̂S − βS0 k1
In the first case we have
1
kX̃(β̂ − β 0 − b)k22 + (λ − τ )kβ̂S c − βS0 c k1 ≤ (2λ + τ )kβ̂S − βS0 k1
n
From this we see that the error β̂ − β ∈ R(L, S) = {x : kxS c k1 ≤ LkxS k1 } for L = 2λ+τ
λ−τ , so
we have:
1
kX̃(β̂ − β 0 − b)k22 + (λ − τ )kβ̂ − β 0 k1 ≤ 3λkβ̂S − βS0 k1
n
√
3λ skX̃(β̂ − β 0 )k2
√
≤
nφΣ̃ (L, S)
√
√
3λ skX̃(β̂ − β 0 − b)k2
3λ skX̃bk2
√
≤
+√
nφΣ̃ (L, S)
nφΣ̃ (L, S)
≤

9λ2 s
1
1
+ kX̃(β̂ − β 0 − b)k22 + kX̃bk22
2
2φΣ̃ (L, S)
n
n

2

by using the inequality xy ≤ x4 + y 2 twice, which finally gives us
(λ − τ )kβ̂ − β 0 k1 ≤

9λ2 s
1
+ kX̃bk22
2
2φΣ̃ (L, S)
n

In the second case we have
1
3
kX̃(β̂ − β 0 − b)k22 + (λ − τ )kβ̂ − β 0 k1 ≤ kX̃bk22
n
n
30

Spectral Deconfounding

So, regardless whether we are in the Case 1 or the Case 2, we get that
(λ − τ )kβ̂ − β 0 k1 ≤

3
9λ2 s
+ kX̃bk22
2
2φΣ̃ (L, S)
n

By dividing by (λ − τ ) = λ/2 we get the required inequality which is what we wanted.
It is interesting to note that we might get better rate of the second term in the case
when kX̃bk2 has larger rate than it will be case in this paper, by taking λ to be larger than
2τ . Since in this case, as we will now see, the penalty level depends on the unknown b, we
decided to use the ”standard” rate of λ.
By dividing by (λ − τ ) and minimizing over λ > τ , we get that the minimum value of
the RHS of the bound is:
s
2
9sτ
9sτ
54skX̃bk22
+
+
φΣ̃ (L, S)2
φΣ̃ (L, S)2
φΣ̃ (L, S)2 n
which is achieved for
s
λ=τ+

τ2 +

2φΣ̃ (L, S)2 kX̃bk22
3sn

In the case when b = 0 and F = In (the usual Lasso regression), we indeed take λ = 2τ .
We can see that, when the coefficient perturbation is present, it is better to penalize more
as this will remove the effect of the perturbation to some extent.
Since L = 2λ+τ
λ−τ and λ ≥ λmin ≥ 2τ , we have L ≤ 5 and then
φΣ̃ (L, S) ≥ φΣ̃ (5, S) = φΣ̃
Finally, by using this and the inequality

p
x2 + y 2 ≤ x + y where x, y > 0, we get

18sτ
kβ̂ − β 0 k1 ≤ 2 +
φΣ̃

s

54skX̃bk22
.
φ2Σ̃ n

Lemma 8 Let A > 0 be arbitrary constant. Let us define
1
τ = Aσ
2

r

log(p)
λmax (F )2
n

Let  ∈ Rn be a vector consisting of i.i.d. sub-Gaussian random with mean zero and variance
σ 2 independent of X. We have

P

2
kX̃ T ˜k∞ ≤ τ
n



2

≥ 1 − 2p1−A /(32 maxi Σii ) − pe−n/136
31

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

k
√i 2 ≤ 2 maxi Σii }, where Xi is the i-th
Proof Let us work on the event Ω2 = {maxi kX
n
2
column of X. Since Xji is a mean zero sub-Gaussian random variable with variance Σii , Xji
satisfies Bernstein’s condition with parameter (8Σii , 4Σii ). Bernstein’s inequality gives us
that
n
nΣ2ii
) = e− 136 .
P( n1 kXi k2 − Σii > Σii ) ≤ exp(−
2
2
2(64Σii + 4Σii )

From here it is easy to see that
P(Ω2 ) ≥ 1 −

X

n

P( n1 kXi k2 > 2Σii ) = 1 − pe− 136

i

Conditionally on X, the components of ζ = n2 X̃ T ˜ = n2 X T F 2  are sub-Gaussian random
variables since they are linear combinations of independent sub-Gaussian random variables;
ζi is sub-Gaussian with mean zero and parameter σi = σk n2 (Xi )T F 2 k2 , where Xi is the i-th
column of X.
From the tail bound for sub-Gaussian random variables, we now get:




X
τ2
τ2
P(kζk∞ ≤ τ ) ≥ 1−
P(|ζi | > τ ) ≥ 1−p max 2 exp − 2 = 1−2 exp −
+ log p
i
2σi
2 maxi σi2
i
We also have on event Ω2 :
2
2σ
4σ
max σi = max σk (Xi )T F 2 k2 ≤
λmax (F )2 max kXi k2 ≤ √ λmax (F )2 max Σii
i
i
i
i
n
n
n
and plugging this and the expression for τ in the expression above gives us
2

P(kζk∞ ≤ τ ) ≥ 1 − 2p

A
1− 32 max
Σ
i

ii

.

2

Which gives us in general that P(kζk∞ ≤ τ ) ≥ 1 − 2p

A
1− 32 max
Σ
i

n

ii

− pe− 136 , as required.

Corollary 1 Consider the model in (2.3) with maxi Σii = O(1) and suppose that λmin (Σ)
is bounded away from zero. For the coefficient perturbation b as in (2.4), assume that
 2

(A1’) kbk22 = O sσ plog p .
Assume additionally that the spectral transformation F in (3.1) with λmax (F ) = 1 satisfies
√
(A2) λmax (X̃) = Op ( p)
(A3) φ2Σ̃ = Ωp (λmin (Σ)).
Then for the penalty level λ  σ
error has the following rate:

q

log p
n , despite the coefficient perturbation, the `1 -estimation

kβ̂ − βk1 = Op

σs
λmin (Σ)
32

r

log p
n

!
.

Spectral Deconfounding

Proof From Theorem 2 we have
kβ̂ − βk1 ≤ C1

sλ
kX̃bk22
+
C
2
nλ
φ2Σ̃

From the assumptions (A1) and (A2) we get
kX̃bk22 ≤ λmax (X̃)2 kbk22 O(sσ 2 log p)
which gives the rate of the second term
kX̃bk22
= Op
nλ

r
sσ

log p
n

!

The assumption (A3) gives us that the rate of the first term is
!
r
sσ
log p
sλ
= Op
λmin (Σ)
n
φ2
Σ̃

which is what we wanted to show.

Lemma
1 Assume that the confounding model (2.1) satisfies λmin (Γ) = λmin (Cov(H, X)) =
√ 
Ω p and cond(ΣE ) = O(1). Then we have:
!
 2
2
2
kδk
kδk
σ
2
−1
2
2
2
kbk2 = kCov(X) Cov(X, H)δk2 ≤ cond(ΣE ) ·
=O
=O
2
λmin (Γ)
p
p
√
The condition λmin (Γ) = Ωp ( p) is satisfied, for example, if pq → 0 and Γ is drawn at random
with either its rows or columns being independent, identically distributed sub-Gaussian random
variables with expectation 0 and covariance matrix ΣΓ , with λmin (ΣΓ ) bounded away from
zero.
−1/2

Proof Let us write C = ΓΣE

and let C = UC DC VCT be its SVD. Then we can write:
−1/2

kbk22 = k(ΓT Γ + ΣE )−1 ΓT δk22 = kΣE
−1/2

= kΣE

(C T C + Ip )−1 C T δk22

T
VC (DC
DC + Ip )−1 DC VCT δk22


T
−1
T 2
≤ λmax (Σ−1
kδk22
E )λmax VC (DC DC + Ip ) DC VC
2

(DC )ii
−1
kδk22
≤ λmin (ΣE ) max
i
(DC )2ii + 1
1
≤ λmin (ΣE )−1
kδk22
λmin (C)2
1
≤ λmin (ΣE )−1
kδk22
−1/2 2
2
λmin (ΣE ) λmin (Γ)
!
 2
kδk22
kδk22
λmax (ΣE )
σ
≤
·
=O
=O
.
2
λmin (ΣE ) λmin (Γ)
p
p
33

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

Now, if the rows or columns of Γ are sub-Gaussian random variables with covariance
matrix Ω, we can write Γ as ZΩ1/2 or Ω1/2 Z respectively, where the rows or columns of Z are
sub-Gaussian random variables with covariance I. In both cases we have from Theorems 5.39
and 5.58 from Vershynin (2016) that there are constants c and C such that with probability
1 − 2 exp(−ct2 ) we have
√

√
√
√
p − C q − t ≤ λmin (Z) ≤ λmax (Z) ≤ p + C q + t

and thus since pq → ∞ we have

√
λmin (Z) = Ωp ( p),

which implies

√
λmin (Γ) = Ωp ( p)

if λmin (Ω) is bounded from below, as we wanted.

Lemma 2 Assume that X ∈ Rn×p is a random matrix whose rows are i.i.d. sub-Gaussian
vectors with covariance
p matrix Σ. Let d1 , . . . , dr ≥ 0 be its singular values. Assume also that
Tr(Σ)  p and that log p/n → 0. We have:
r

1X 2
di = Tr(Σ)(1 + op (1)).
n
i=1

√
Furthermore, when p > n, dbtnc = Op ( p) for any t ∈ (0, 1).
Proof We have

r

1X 2
di = Tr( n1 X T X) = Tr(Σ̂)
n
i=1

1 T
Since
qthe rows
 of X are sub-Gaussian random vectors, we get that k n X X − Σk∞ =
log p
Op
, as in Lemma 8. This gives us that
n

r
| Tr( n1 X T X) − Tr(Σ)| = Op

p

log p
n

!
.

Therefore, we have
r

1X 2
di − Tr(Σ) = Op
n
i=1

r
p

log p
n

!

and the result follows since we have assumed that Tr(Σ) = Ω(p).

Lemma 9 Let B ∈ Rp×p be a symmetric positive definite matrix and let A ∈ Rn×p be
arbitrary matrix, n < p. Let λi (A) and λi (AB) be the i-th largest singular values of A and
34

Spectral Deconfounding

AB respectively. Assume that the smallest singular value of B is at least 1. For i ≤ n, we
have
λi (A) ≤ λi (AB).
On the other hand, if we assume that the largest singular value of B is at most 1, we have
for i ≤ n that
λi (A) ≥ λi (AB).
Proof Let us first show the first statement. Let e1 , . . . , en i f1 , . . . , fn be the left singular
vectors of A and AB corresponding to the singular values in a decreasing order. For i = 1,
since λmin (B) ≥ 1, we have:
λ1 (AB) ≥ k(AB)T e1 k2 ≥ kBAT e1 k2 ≥ kAT e1 k2 = λ1 (A)
Let us proceed by induction. Since dim(U ∩ V ) ≥ dim(U ) + dim(V ) − n, we conclude that
Fk = span {f1 , . . . , fk }⊥ P
and span {e1 , . . . ek+1 } have a non-trivial intersection, so we can
T
choose a unit vector v = k+1
j=1 αj ej ∈ Fk . Since λk+1 (AB) = max{(AB) x : x ∈ Fk , kxk2 =
1}, we have:
v
uk+1
uX
T
T
λk+1 (AB) ≥ k(AB) vk2 ≥ kA vk2 = t
αj2 λj (A)2 ≥ λk+1 (A)
j=1

P 2
The second inequality holds because λmin (B) ≥ 1 and the last because
αj = 1 and λi (A)
are decreasing.
We can derive the second statement from the first one by considering B ← B −1 , A ← AB,
since if B has all singular values below 1, B −1 has all singular values at least equal to 1.

Lemma 3 Assume that p > n and that X has i.i.d. sub-Gaussian rows with covariance
√
matrix Σ = ΓT Γ + ΣE , where Γ ∈ Rq×p and λmax (ΣE ) = O(1), then we have dq+1 = Op ( p).
Proof We can write X = ZΣ1/2 , where the rows of Z are i.i.d. sub-Gaussian random
variables and Cov(Z) = Ip . From Theorem 5.39 from Vershynin (2016) we now have that
there exist constants c and C such that
√
√
p + C n + t ≥ λmin (Z)
√
with probability at least 1 − 2 exp(−ct2 ). Therefore λmax (Z) = Op ( p).
From this, the assumption λmax (ΣE ) = O(1) and the second part of Lemma 5, we have
that:
√
λq+1 (X) = λq+1 (X) ≤ λq+1 (Σ1/2 )λmax (Z) ≤ λmax (ΣE )1/2 λmax (Z) = Op ( p),
as required.

35

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

Lemma 5 Assume that X is a random design matrix with i.i.d. rows with covariance
matrix Σ and suppose p > n. Assume that any of the following conditions is satisfied:
i) the rows of X have a sub-Gaussian distribution and np → ∞
ii) the rows of X have a N (0, Σ) distribution and lim inf np > 1
iii) the rows of X have N (0, Σ) distribution and lim sup nk < 1
Then we have
d2k = Ωp (λmin (Σ)p).
Proof Let us write X = ZΣ1/2 where Z ∈ Rn×p is a matrix with i.i.d. sub-Gaussian rows
with covariance matrix Ip . Let ζ1 ≤ . . . ≤ ζn be the singular values of Z.
Since we can write X = ZΣ1/2 , by Lemma 9, we have dk ≥ λmin (Σ)1/2 ζk , so it suffices
to show that ζk = Ωp (p1/2 ).
If we are under the first set of assumptions, we have from Theorem 5.39 from Vershynin
(2010) that there exist constants c and C such that
√

√
p − C n − t ≤ ζn

with probability at least 1 − 2 exp(−ct2 ). Therefore, since np → ∞, we have ζk ≥ ζn =
Ωp (p1/2 ), as required.
If we are under the second set of assumptions, we have that the entries of Z are i.i.d.
N (0, 1) variables. From Corollary 5.35 from Vershynin (2010) that there exists constant c
such that
√
√
p − n − t ≤ ζn
with probability at least 1 − 2 exp(−ct2 ). Therefore, since lim inf np > 1, we have ζk ≥ ζn =
Ωp (p1/2 ), as required.
If we are under the third set of assumptions, we can assume np → 1, because otherwise
we would be under the second set of assumptions. The empirical distribution of the nonzero
singular values of n1 Z T Z converges to the Marchenko-Pastur density supported on [0, 4]
(Marchenko and Pastur, 1967), which is given by
r
4−x
1
1{x ∈ [0, 4]}
2π
x
Let t = lim sup nk < 1. Then we can choose 0 < δ < 1 − t and z > 0 such that
P(ζ > z) = t + δ, where ζ is drawn from the Marchenko-Pastur density given above.
We have
T
# singular values of Z n Z larger than z
→t+δ
n
T

so the number of singular values of Z n Z which are larger than z will eventually be larger
d2

than nt > k, therefore nk > z > 0 eventually, so ζk = Ωp (n1/2 ) = Ωp (p1/2 ), as required.

36

Spectral Deconfounding

Lemma 4 Let X be generated from the confounding model (2.1) and let FPbe a spectral
transformation shrinking the first q singular values of X to 0. If q is fixed, p1 pi,j=1 |(ΣE )ij |
log p
upper bounded and n sp
min(n,p) → 0, we have that, with probability converging to 1, the

compatibility condition holds for the transformed design matrix X̃ = F X:
φ21
n

p

X̃ T X̃

→ φ21

T
nE E

= Ωp (λmin (ΣE )) .

Proof Let us denote C = HΓ and let us have C̃ = X − X̃ = U (D − D̃)V T , where (D − D̃) is
a (r × r)-dimensional diagonal matrix (recall r = min(n, p)) whose first q diagonal elements
correspond to the first q diagonal elements of X and the remaining r − q elements are zero.
C̃ corresponds to the first q principal components and is a commonly used estimator of C in
the factor analysis literature.
From Theorem 3 in Bai (2003) we have for q fixed that
√ √
2
min( n, p)(C̃ij − Cij ) = N (0, σij
),
2 < B is bounded from above. By using the standard union bound argument as in
where σij
Lemma 8, we have that
s
!
log p
kC̃ − Ck∞ = Op
min(n, p)

Therefore, since we have X = C − C̃ + E, we obtain by triangle inequality, the fact that
√
kxk2 ≤ pkxk1 for x ∈ Rp and the Hlder’s inequality that
1
1
1
√ kXαk2 ≥ √ kEαk2 − √ k(C̃ − C)αk2
n
n
n
1 √
1
pkC̃ − Ck∞ kαk1
≥ √ kEαk2 − √
n
n
1
1 √
≥ √ kEαk2 − √
pkC̃ − Ck∞ (6kαS k1 ) .
n
n
Therefore, from the definition of the compatibility constant, we now have
√
6 ps
φΣ̃ ≥ φ 1 T − √ kC̃ − Ck∞ → φ 1 T ,
n
nE E
nE E
in probability, since
√

r
pskC̃ − Ck∞ = Op

converges to 0 in probability.
Finally, one can obtain that φ21

T
nE E

ps
n

s

log p
min(n, p)

!

= Ωp (λmin (ΣE )) from the standard argument as

in Bühlmann and van de Geer (2011), i.e. by using that n1 E T E concentrates around its
expectation ΣE .

37

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

Lemma 6 Consider an arbitrary spectral transformation F as in (3.2). Let 1 ≤ k < r =
min(n, p) be an arbitrary integer. Then:
φ2Σ̃ ≥

r
X
1
i=1

1
d˜2(i) (φ2Mi − φ2Mi−1 ) ≥ d˜2(k) φ2Mk ,
n
n



T
where Mk = V(1) , . . . , V(k) V(1) , . . . , V(k) .
Proof We have
αT Σ̃α =

X

d˜2i (ViT α)2 =

i≤r

X

(d˜2(i) − d˜2(i+1) )

X

T
α)2
(V(j)

j≤i

i≤r

where we define d˜r+1 = 0 for convenience. Now using the fact that the infimum of the sum
is not smaller than the sum of the infimums, we get
X1
X1
φ2Σ̃ ≥
(d˜2(i) − d˜2(i+1) )φ2Mi =
d˜2 (φ2 − φ2Mi−1 )
n
n (i) Mi
i≤r

i≤r

where M0 is defined as the null matrix for convenience. Let us now fix k ≤ r. By using that
the sequence d˜(i) is decreasing, we have
X1
i≤r

n

d˜2(i) (φ2Mi − φ2Mi−1 ) ≥

X1
i≤k

1
d˜2 (φ2 − φ2Mi−1 ) = d˜2(k) φ2Mk
n (k) Mi
n

which finishes the proof.

Lemma 7 If p > n and V has a uniform distribution on the Stiefel manifold, then for any
k = Ω(n), we have
 
n
φ2Mk = Ωp
.
p
i.i.d.

Proof Let Z ∈ Rk×p be a random matrix whose components are Zij ∼ N (0, 1). Let
Z = UZ DZ VZT be its SVD and let ζ1 ≥ . . . ≥ ζk be its singular values.
Since V is independent of D, [V(1) , . . . , V(k) ] is uniform on the Stiefel manifold as well.
This matrix has the same distribution as the matrix VZ and thus Mk has same distribution
as VZ VZT
From the Lasso theory (Bühlmann and van de Geer (2011)) we know that φ21 Z T Z ≥ 1/2
with high probability. On the other hand we have φ21 Z T Z ≤ k1 ζ12 φ2V V T .

k

Z Z

k

From Corollary 5.35. of Vershynin (2016) we know
p
√
√
ζ1 ≤ p + k + C log p
√
2
with probability at least 1 − 2p−C /2 , for any C > 0.
that ζ1 = Op ( p). By
 Thisimplies

combining those results, we have that φ2V V T = Ωp
Z Z

38

k
p

= Ωp

n
p

, which finishes the proof.

Spectral Deconfounding

Acknowledgments. The research of D. Ćevid and P. Bühlmann was supported by the
European Research Council under the Grant Agreement No 786461 (CausalStats - ERC2017-ADG).

References
Theodore Wilbur Anderson. An introduction to multivariate statistical analysis, volume 2.
Wiley New York, 1958.
Jushan Bai. Inferential theory for factor models of large dimensions. Econometrica, 71(1):
135–171, 2003.
Jushan Bai and Serena Ng. Confidence intervals for diffusion index forecasts and inference
for factor-augmented regressions. Econometrica, 74(4):1133–1150, 2006.
Peter J Bickel, Yaacov Ritov, Alexandre B Tsybakov, et al. Simultaneous analysis of lasso
and dantzig selector. The Annals of Statistics, 37(4):1705–1732, 2009.
Xin Bing, Florentina Bunea, Yang Ning, and Marten Wegkamp. Adaptive estimation in
structured factor models with applications to overlapping clustering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.06977, 2017.
Xin Bing, Florentina Bunea, Marten Wegkamp, and Seth Strimas-Mackey. Essential regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.12696, 2019.
M Alan Brookhart, Til Stürmer, Robert J Glynn, Jeremy Rassen, and Sebastian Schneeweiss.
Confounding control in healthcare database research: challenges and potential approaches.
Medical care, 48(6 0):S114, 2010.
Peter Bühlmann and Sara van de Geer. Statistics for high-dimensional data: methods, theory
and applications. Springer Science & Business Media, 2011.
Gary Chamberlain and Michael Rothschild. Arbitrage, factor structure, and mean-variance
analysis on large asset markets. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research,
1982.
Venkat Chandrasekaran, Pablo A Parrilo, and Alan S Willsky. Latent variable graphical
model selection via convex optimization. Annals of Statistics, 40(4):1935–1967, 2012.
Victor Chernozhukov, Christian Hansen, Yuan Liao, et al. A lava attack on the recovery of
sums of dense and sparse signals. The Annals of Statistics, 45(1):39–76, 2017.
David L Donoho, Matan Gavish, and Iain M Johnstone. Optimal shrinkage of eigenvalues in
the spiked covariance model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1311.0851, 2013.
Jianqing Fan, Yuan Liao, and Martina Mincheva. Large covariance estimation by thresholding
principal orthogonal complements. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
(Statistical Methodology), 75(4):603–680, 2013.
39

Ćevid, Bühlmann and Meinshausen

Jianqing Fan, Yuan Ke, and Kaizheng Wang. Factor-adjusted regularized model selection.
Journal of Econometrics, 2020.
Johann A Gagnon-Bartsch and Terence P Speed. Using control genes to correct for unwanted
variation in microarray data. Biostatistics, 13(3):539–552, 2012.
David Gerard and Matthew Stephens. Empirical bayes shrinkage and false discovery rate
estimation, allowing for unwanted variation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.10066, 2017.
Christophe Giraud. Introduction to high-dimensional statistics. Chapman and Hall/CRC,
2014.
Sander Greenland, James M Robins, and Judea Pearl. Confounding and collapsibility in
causal inference. Statistical science, pages 29–46, 1999.
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Martin Wainwright. Statistical learning with sparsity:
the lasso and generalizations. CRC press, 2015.
Jim C Huang and Nebojsa Jojic. Variable selection through correlation sifting. In International Conference on Research in Computational Molecular Biology, pages 106–123.
Springer, 2011.
Peter J Huber. Robust statistics. Springer, 2011.
Dominik Janzing and Bernhard Schölkopf. Detecting non-causal artifacts in multivariate
linear regression models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.00810, 2018.
Jinzhu Jia, Karl Rohe, et al. Preconditioning the lasso for sign consistency. Electronic
Journal of Statistics, 9(1):1150–1172, 2015.
Jeffrey T Leek and John D Storey. Capturing heterogeneity in gene expression studies by
surrogate variable analysis. PLoS genetics, 3(9):e161, 2007.
Vladimir Alexandrovich Marchenko and Leonid Andreevich Pastur. Distribution of eigenvalues for some sets of random matrices. Matematicheskii Sbornik, 114(4):507–536, 1967.
John Novembre and Matthew Stephens. Interpreting principal component analyses of spatial
population genetic variation. Nature genetics, 40(5):646, 2008.
John Novembre, Toby Johnson, Katarzyna Bryc, Zoltán Kutalik, Adam R Boyko, Adam
Auton, Amit Indap, Karen S King, Sven Bergmann, Matthew R Nelson, et al. Genes
mirror geography within europe. Nature, 456(7218):98, 2008.
Debashis Paul, Eric Bair, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani. ”preconditioning” for
feature selection and regression in high-dimensional problems. The Annals of Statistics,
pages 1595–1618, 2008.
Rajen Shah and Nicolai Meinshausen. Rsvp-graphs: Fast high-dimensional covariance matrix
estimation under latent confounding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.01076, 2018.
40

Spectral Deconfounding

Sara Van de Geer. Estimation and testing under sparsity. Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
2159, 2016.
Roman Vershynin. Introduction to the non-asymptotic analysis of random matrices. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1011.3027, 2010.
Roman Vershynin. High dimensional probability. An Introduction with Applications, 2016.
Martin J Wainwright. High-dimensional statistics: A non-asymptotic viewpoint, volume 48.
Cambridge University Press, 2019.
Yixin Wang and David M Blei.
arXiv:1805.06826, 2018.

The blessings of multiple causes.

41

arXiv preprint

